RFC 117: Use a container runtime (#117)
alphagov/govuk-rfcs: rfc-117-container-runtime.md

- Multiple applications share the operating system of the same virtual machine. This means it’s not easy to upgrade a single application at a time. Furthermore, the way our [Puppet code](http://github.com/alphagov/govuk-puppet/) is written makes supporting virtual machines on different operating systems at the same time hard to support.
- GOV.UK currently uses upstart as our init system, but newer versions of Ubuntu switch to systemd. This means GOV.UK will need to do a significant rewrite of our init scripts as part of an upgrade.
- Our current version of Puppet is 3.8, which is no longer supported (the current version is 6.13). Support for newer operating system versions is likely to be lacking in unsupported versions of Puppet.
- Other infrastructure as code tools in use (e.g. [Fabric](https://github.com/alphagov/fabric-scripts)) are also currently using very old versions which are very likely to have problems with newer operating systems.

## Proposal

GOV.UK will use a managed, container based hosting environment, such as [GOV.UK PaaS](https://www.cloud.service.gov.uk). The choice of hosting environment is out of scope for this RFC.

> GOV.UK applications and their dependencies will be built into container images. This may be done using buildpacks or other means - this decision is also out of scope for this RFC.

Reviewer: I don't really understand "buildpacks", but I thought the buildpack approach was explicitly different from building images (or at least building images yourself). If that's the case, then this is a bit contradictory?

Reviewer 2: is it specifically this -> https://buildpacks.io ?

Reviewer 3: The terminology gets a bit confusing:

- currently in cloud foundry, buildpacks are used to build "droplets", which are a bit like an image that's missing the base layer
- droplets are combined with "stacks" (which are a bit like base layers) to form containers
- there are also [Cloud Native Buildpacks](https://buildpacks.io/), which _do_ build images (in OCI format)

In that light, buildpacks should really be seen as alternatives to Dockerfiles, not alternatives to docker images.

This sentence is really just here to make it clear that just because we're talking about containers, it doesn't necessarily mean we're excluding buildpacks from the discussion. It should probably say "containers" not "container images" though, to be fully correct.

```suggestion
GOV.UK applications and their dependencies will be built into containers. This may be done using buildpacks, Dockerfile or some other means - this decision is also out of scope for this RFC.
```

Reviewer: > This sentence is really just here to make it clear that just because we're talking about containers, it doesn't necessarily mean we're excluding buildpacks from the discussion. It should probably say "containers" not "container images" though, to be fully correct.

At least currently, I'm not sure it's adding clarity. I assumed that part of this proposal was explicitly excluding some approaches to "containers" by excluding approaches that don't use images. If that is the case, it would be good to give at least one example of an excluded approach.

If I'm interpreting your view Richard, maybe saying something like "GOV.UK applications will deployed through containers to a managed, container based hosting environment" would be clearer and more concise?

Reviewer 3: > I assumed that part of this proposal was explicitly excluding some approaches to "containers" by excluding approaches that don't use images. If that is the case, it would be good to give at least one example of an excluded approach.

That's not the intention, hence "or other means". The idea is just "we'll use a managed platform that runs containers for us". The RFC isn't trying to say anything about how we build the applications into containers - I think it's best to have a separate discussion about those (which probably wants to be informed by some technical research).

Reviewer 3: I've tried to make this a little bit clearer as suggested above in e72f336.

Hopefully there will be a future RFC where we can discuss the buildpacks / cloud native buildpacks / Nix / Guix / Dockerfile decision. There's a lot to think about though, so let's keep it separate.

GOV.UK has a significant amount of infrastructure outside of the applications themselves. In moving to a container based hosting platform, it’s possible that some existing behaviour may be missed, resulting in bugs.
### Risks of not doing this

Choosing not to move to a container runtime will mean that GOV.UK will have to upgrade from Ubuntu Trusty "in place" (i.e. by making significant changes to govuk-puppet). This will require significant effort for limited benefit, and is potentially wasted work as once the upgrade is done GOV.UK will still want to consider if running VMs is the right approach.

GOV.UK will also have to tackle a number of difficult tooling upgrades (Puppet, in particular) if GOV.UK wants to return to a situation where GOV.UK does not use unsupported dependencies.

GOV.UK will be harder for the rest of GDS to support, because its infrastructure will be significantly different. Almost all other service teams in GDS are using a container based hosting environment of some kind (mostly [CloudFoundry](https://www.cloudfoundry.org) or AWS ECS).
### Follow up work

GOV.UK will commit to doing these things:

> - Investigate the practicalities involved in using different container runtimes to host GOV.UK (for example, how difficult will it be to run a hybrid containerised / non-containerised environment in [GOV.UK PaaS](https://www.cloud.service.gov.uk) vs. say [AWS ECS](https://aws.amazon.com/ecs/))

Reviewer: Given the proposal specifically talks about managed hosting providers, it might be clearer to stick to that language here, if that matches the intent?

```suggestion
- Investigate the practicalities involved in using different managed, container based hosting environments for GOV.UK (for example, how difficult will it be to run a hybrid containerised / non-containerised environment in [GOV.UK PaaS](https://www.cloud.service.gov.uk) vs. say [AWS ECS](https://aws.amazon.com/ecs/))
```

Reviewer: Additionally, formatting it differently, and removing the names of different hosting providers might make it clearer:

- Investigate the practicalities involved in using different managed, container based hosting environments for GOV.UK
   - Including how difficult will it be to run a hybrid containerised / non-containerised environment

Reviewer 3: Yep, addressed that in 9edd833
